Rewrite compute shader tutorial (#6698)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/shaders/compute_shaders.rst

Using compute shaders
=====================

This tutorial will walk you through the process of creating a minimal compute
shader. But first, a bit of background on compute shaders and how they work with
Godot.

.. note::

>    This tutorial assumes familiarity with non-compute shaders. If you are new to

Reviewer: "non-compute shaders" sounds a bit strange. Maybe it should be "vertex and fragment shaders"?

Author: What about?

>  This tutorial assumes familiarity with shaders generally.

   shaders please read :ref:`doc_introduction_to_shaders` and :ref:`your first
   shader <toc-your-first-shader>` before proceeding with this tutorial.

> A compute shader is a special type of shader program that is orientated towards
> general purpose programming. In other words, they are more flexible than vertex
> shaders and fragment shaders as they don't have a fixed purpose (i.e.
> transforming vertices or writing colors to an image). Unlike fragment shaders
> and vertex shaders compute shaders have very little going on behind the scenes,
> the code you write is what the GPU runs and very little else. This can make them
> a very useful tool to offload heavy calculations to the GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A compute shader is a special type of shader program that is orientated towards
general purpose programming. In other words, they are more flexible than vertex
shaders and fragment shaders as they don't have a fixed purpose (i.e.
transforming vertices or writing colors to an image). Unlike fragment shaders
and vertex shaders, compute shaders have very little going on behind the scenes. The code you write is what the GPU runs and very little else. This can make them
a very useful tool to offload heavy calculations to the GPU.
```

> transforming vertices or writing colors to an image). Unlike fragment shaders
> and vertex shaders compute shaders have very little going on behind the scenes,
> the code you write is what the GPU runs and very little else. This can make them
> a very useful tool to offload heavy calculations to the GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transforming vertices or writing colors to an image). Unlike fragment shaders
and vertex shaders, compute shaders have very little going on behind the scenes. The code you write is what the GPU runs and very little else. This can make them
a very useful tool to offload heavy calculations to the GPU.
```

Now let's get started by creating a short compute shader.

> First, in the text editor of your choice create a new file called
> "compute_example.glsl". When you write compute shaders in Godot, you write them
> in GLSL directly. The Godot shader language is based off of GLSL so if you are
> familiar with normal shaders in Godot the syntax below will look somewhat
> familiar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, in the **external** text editor of your choice, create a new file called
``compute_example.glsl`` in your project folder. When you write compute shaders in Godot, you write them
in GLSL directly. The Godot shader language is based on GLSL. If you are
familiar with normal shaders in Godot, the syntax below will look somewhat
familiar.
```

.. note::

   Compute shaders can only be used from RenderingDevice-based renderers (the
   Forward+ or Mobile renderer). To follow along with this tutorial, ensure that
   you are using the Forward+ or Mobile renderer. The setting for which is
   located in the top right-hand corner of the editor.

Let's take a look at this compute shader code:

.. code-block:: glsl

    #[compute]
    #version 450

    // Invocations in the (x, y, z) dimension
    layout(local_size_x = 2, local_size_y = 1, local_size_z = 1) in;

    // A binding to the buffer we create in our script
    layout(set = 0, binding = 0, std430) restrict buffer MyDataBuffer {
        float data[];
    }
    my_data_buffer;

    // The code we want to execute in each invocation
    void main() {
        // gl_GlobalInvocationID.x uniquely identifies this invocation across all work groups
        my_data_buffer.data[gl_GlobalInvocationID.x] *= 2.0;
    }

This code takes an array of floats, multiplies each element by 2 and store the
results back in the buffer array. Now let's look at it line-by-line.

.. code-block:: glsl

    #[compute]
    #version 450

These two lines communicate two things:

>  1. The following code is a compute shader. This is a godot specific hint that is needed for the editor to properly import the shader file.
>  2. The code is using GLSL version 450.
> 
> For your custom compute shaders you should never have to change these two lines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 1. The following code is a compute shader. This is a Godot-specific hint that is needed for the editor to properly import the shader file.
 2. The code is using GLSL version 450.

For your custom compute shaders, you should never have to change these two lines.
```

.. code-block:: glsl

    // Invocations in the (x, y, z) dimension
    layout(local_size_x = 2, local_size_y = 1, local_size_z = 1) in;

> Next we communicate the number of invocations to be used in each workgroup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we communicate the number of invocations to be used in each workgroup.
```

Invocations are instances of the shader that are running within the same
workgroup. When we launch a compute shader from the CPU, we tell it how many
workgroups to run. Workgroups run in parellel to each other. While running one

> workgroup, you cannot access information in another workgroup. Invocations in
> the same workgroup however, can have some limited access to other invocations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
workgroup, you cannot access information in another workgroup. However,
invocations in the same workgroup can have some limited access to other invocations.
```

                  for (int local_z = 0; local_z < invocation_size_z; local_z++) {
                     // Compute shader runs here.
                  }
               }
            }
         }
      }
    }
            

Workgroups and invocations are an advanced topic, for now remember that we will
be running two invocations per workgroup.

.. code-block:: glsl

    // A binding to the buffer we create in our script
    layout(set = 0, binding = 0, std430) restrict buffer MyDataBuffer {
        float data[];
    }
    my_data_buffer;

Here we provide information about the memory that the compute shader will have
access to. The ``layout`` property allows us to tell the shader where to look
for the buffer, we will need to match these ``set`` and ``binding`` positions
from the CPU side later. 

The ``restrict`` keyword tells the shader that this buffer is only going to be
accessed from one place in this shader. In other words, we won't bind this
buffer in another ``set`` or ``binding`` index. This is important as it allows
the shader compiler to optimize the shader code. Always use ``restrict`` when
you can.

> This is an unsized buffer meaning that it can be any size. So we need to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is an unsized buffer, which means it can be any size. So we need to be
```

careful not to read from an index larger than the size of the buffer.

.. code-block:: glsl

    // The code we want to execute in each invocation
    void main() {
        // gl_GlobalInvocationID.x uniquely identifies this invocation across all work groups
        my_data_buffer.data[gl_GlobalInvocationID.x] *= 2.0;
    }

Finally, we write the ``main`` function which is where all the logic happens. We
access a position in the storage buffer using the ``gl_GlobalInvocationID``
built in variables. ``gl_GlobalInvocationID`` gives you the global unique ID for
the current invocation.

> To continue copy the code above into your newly created "compute_example.glsl"

Reviewer: I would suggest writing code instead of copy-pasting it – it's better for memorization and learning.

```suggestion
To continue, write the code above into your newly created ``compute_example.glsl``.
```

file.

Create a local RenderingDevice
------------------------------

> To interact with and execute a compute shader we need a script. So go ahead and
> create a new script in the language of your choice and attach it to any Node in
> your scene.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To interact with and execute a compute shader, we need a script.
Create a new script in the language of your choice and attach it to any Node
in your scene.
```

> Now to execute our shader we need a local :ref:`RenderingDevice
> <class_RenderingDevice>` which can be created using the :ref:`RenderingServer
> <class_RenderingServer>`:

Reviewer: References can be shortened, as class pages' titles match the actual class names:

```suggestion
Now to execute our shader we need a local :ref:`class_RenderingDevice`
which can be created using the :ref:`class_RenderingServer`:
```

    // Create a local rendering device.
    var rd = RenderingServer.CreateLocalRenderingDevice();

> After that we can load the newly created shader file "compute_example.glsl" and
> create a pre-compiled version of it using this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that, we can load the newly created shader file ``compute_example.glsl``
and create a precompiled version of it using this:
```

Provide input data
------------------

> As you might remember we want to pass an input array to our shader, multiply
> each element by 2 and get the results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you might remember, we want to pass an input array to our shader, multiply
each element by 2 and get the results.
```

> To pass values to a compute shader we need to create a buffer. We are dealing
> with an array of floats, so we will use a storage buffer for this example. A
> storage buffer takes an array of bytes and allows the CPU to transfer data to
> and from the GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To pass values to a compute shader, we need to create a buffer. We are dealing
with an array of floats, so we will use a storage buffer for this example. A
storage buffer takes an array of bytes and allows the CPU to transfer data to
and from the GPU.
```

Author: rephrased

    // Each float has 8 byte (32 bit) so 10 x 8 = 80 bytes
    var buffer = rd.StorageBufferCreate((uint)inputBytes.Length, inputBytes);

> With the buffer in place we need to tell the rendering device to use this
> buffer. To do that we will need to create a uniform (like in normal shaders) and
> assign it to a uniform set which we can pass to our shader later.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the buffer in place we need to tell the rendering device to use this
buffer. To do that, we will need to create a uniform (like in normal shaders)
and assign it to a uniform set which we can pass to our shader later.
```

Author: A comma should not go here, it breaks the flow of the sentence

    rd.ComputeListDispatch(computeList, xGroups: 5, yGroups: 1, zGroups: 1);
    rd.ComputeListEnd();

> Note that we are dispatching the compute shader with 5 work groups in the
> x-axis, and one in the others. Since we have 2 local invocations in the x-axis
> (specified in our shader) 10 compute shader invocations will be launched in
> total. If you read or write to indices outside of the range of your buffer, you
> may access memory outside of your shaders control or parts of other variables
> which may cause issues on some hardware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that we are dispatching the compute shader with 5 work groups in the
X axis, and one in the others. Since we have 2 local invocations in the X axis
(specified in our shader), 10 compute shader invocations will be launched in
total. If you read or write to indices outside of the range of your buffer, you
may access memory outside of your shaders control or parts of other variables
which may cause issues on some hardware.
```

Execute a compute shader
------------------------

> After all of this we are almost done, we still need to execute our pipeline. So
> far we have only recorded what we would like the GPU to do, we have not actually
> run the shader program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After all of this, we're almost done. We still need to execute our pipeline. So
far, we have only recorded what we would like the GPU to do; we have **not** actually
run the shader program.
```

Author: rephrased

> To execute our compute shader we just need to submit the pipeline to the GPU and

Reviewer: Avoid "just":

```suggestion
To execute our compute shader, we need to submit the pipeline to the GPU and
```

Author: removed "just", but I don't think a comma belongs here, it fragments the sentence awkwardly

    rd.Submit();
    rd.Sync();

> Ideally, you would not call ``sync()`` to synchronize the RenderingDevice right
> away as it will cause the CPU to wait for the GPU to finish working. In our
> example we synchronize right away because we want our data available for reading
> right away. In general, you will want to wait at least a few frames before
> synchronizing so that the GPU is able to run in parellel with the CPU.

Reviewer: 2-3 frames is a recommend delay for waiting:

```suggestion
Ideally, you would not call ``sync()`` to synchronize the RenderingDevice right
away as it will cause the CPU to wait for the GPU to finish working. In our
example, we synchronize right away because we want our data available for reading
right away. In general, you will want to wait at least 2-3 frames before
synchronizing so that the GPU is able to run in parellel with the CPU.
```

Retrieving results
------------------

> You may have noticed in the example shader we modified the contents of the
> storage buffer. I.e the shader read from our array and stored the data in the
> same array again so our results are already there. Let's retrieve the data and
> print the results to our console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You may have noticed that in the example shader, we modified the contents of the
storage buffer. In other words, the shader read from our array and stored the data in the
same array again so our results are already there. Let's retrieve the data and
print the results to our console.
```
